---
layout: post
tags : [css, responsive,]
title: "How to do it the DNA way"
author: "pitchandtone"
---

We've been doing front end development for a while and have been seeing a couple of trends for us.

1. Bigger and more complex jobs due to responsive and increasing online services.
2. Bigger and more diverse teams needed due to bigger jobs.

This meant we needed to standardize the way we work.

In the past we had look at OOCSS to solve our issues however with responsive that gets quite clunky quite quickly. You 
end up with needing col-sm-1, col-md-2, col-lrg-1 etc. While that works OK-ish for grids it doesn't for much else. We 
had been using classes like f-left for float:left, however now we were going to need, sm-f-left, md-f-left, lrg-f-left 
etc. 

Wasn't going to be fun for anyone.

Meanwhile we'd seen BEM being talked about and thought it looked a bit weird.

We had decided on mobile first on our first big responsive project (wellington.govt.nz), and had created a stylesheet 
for each breakpoint. Each stylesheet was getting quite large by the time Will got assigned to the job, so he introduced 
Grunt and we've never looked back.

We then moved onto our next big responsive project and while Grunt was helping us keep stylesheets smaller, there was a 
lot of searching going on. It wasn't clear what bits were re-usable and which weren't. This resulted in a lot of 
coupling and some hard to maintain code.

We looked at BEM again. Now it made sense.

So we re-factored our grunt tasks, included our javascript in a component folders alongside our CSS and have recommended 
sticking to completely independent components as much as possible.

The goals are:
 * Separate development stylesheets for each breakpoint
 * Mobile browsers should receive their styles first.
 * One minified production stylesheet
 * Classname and breakpoint stylesheet pinpoint exactly which file needs to be edited

It'll probably morph a bit over time, but so far so good.

Comments, questions, thoughts welcome on [github.com/dnadesign/dna_frontend_boilerplate](https://github.com/dnadesign/dna_frontend_boilerplate)